So thank you, and welcome to Graphics and
Media State of the Union.
And thanks for staying around
for the last session of the day.
So past WWCs have been all
about Mac OS the platform.
And this year is really exciting
because we have a new platform.
The iPhone OS platform.
And many of the sessions you're going
to be going to this week will be
talking about both of these platforms.
And for this session,
the theme that we're going to use,
one of the themes we're going to use,
is we're going to emphasize
the importance of scalability.
And a great example of
scalability is display sizes.
You want your graphics to look good
on everything from the iPhone all the
way up to this huge display behind us.
So we're going to be talking
about that as a theme of the
technologies that we are going to be
delivering in the iPhone and Mac OS.
So there's other important variables.
CPU differences, GPU differences,
they vary in power, performance,
storage size, memory.
You have to be efficient with all these.
And with mobile users becoming more
and more part of the product line
and what we're selling to people,
we want your applications to be as
efficient and give your users the
best mobile experience possible.
So you want to be
efficient with batteries.
So Apple has a wealth of technologies.
And today,
we're going to focus in on a few
key graphics and media technologies.
And importantly,
we're going to talk about how Apple has
taken these technologies and scaled them
across the iPhone OS and the Mac OS.
Many of them are common,
and then there's a few that
are going to be different.
And we're going to talk about those
and focus on these key technologies.
So we're going to talk about graphics,
we're going to talk about media,
and then we're going to talk about
getting access to that great graphics
and media technology through the web.
So, let's start with graphics.
At the heart of graphics is the GPU.
And GPUs have been getting
incredibly fast over the years.
As many of you saw in Bertrand's session,
this chart, GPUs have been growing
in power and performance,
and they're just an incredible
asset to use for graphics and media.
But an interesting trend that
has been happening along that
time has been their features.
Back in 2000, 2002,
GPUs were largely fixed function devices.
And the way I look at that is that they
were largely designed for a specific API,
meaning they provided the features
necessary to accelerate and rasterize
for a particular API.
And then came along shaders,
the ability to write programs
and to upload them onto the GPU.
And this enabled a whole new array of
possibilities of what you could do.
And we started seeing all
kinds of new technologies
and new imaging applications,
what you could accelerate.
But recently,
GPUs started taking on some new features.
And we look at those as compute features,
features that started making the
GPU look more and more like the CPU.
So what do we mean by compute features?
The first thing is precision.
IEEE floating-point mathematics,
the ability to accelerate high-precision,
IEEE-compliant mathematics on the GPU.
And this is incredibly important
for many types of algorithms you're
going to want to run if you're
going to target it for the GPU.
The second being flow control.
And what I mean by flow control is the
ability to manage tasks on the GPU to
be able to control their execution.
And third, memory access.
Have a better, more flexible ability to
read and write to memory.
And together, these three things,
these three groups of features,
we call compute capabilities
that GPUs are taking on.
And with that, as you've seen,
we introduced a new
technology called OpenCL.
And OpenCL stands for
Open Compute Library.
So, let's talk a little bit about that.
So OpenCL is designed to leverage
the compute features of the GPU.
But it's not just for the GPU.
It's for the CPU and the GPU.
It's optimized for both.
It has an easy programming model.
That was really,
really important when we designed it.
We wanted it to be as simple as possible.
We made it integrated with OpenGL such
that they played well together.
They complement each other.
So let's talk about how we have made it
leverage the compute features of the GPU.
Traditional shader languages allowed
you to read from multiple locations
and then write to a single location.
With OpenCL,
the language allows you to read
from multiple locations and
write to multiple locations.
And this is what I meant by
more flexible memory access.
And this is what will enable
you to have greater flexibility,
what kind of problems,
what kind of algorithms you
can accelerate on the GPU.
This is a key feature.
Another feature is what
we call atomic operations.
And what that means is the ability
to go and increment or decrement a
value in memory in a way that you're
guaranteed to get the right result.
Because you have many tasks running,
many work queues trying
to access that memory,
and you need to be able to synchronize
and to change memory and guarantee
that that increment or decrementing
of that value is going to be correct.
So this is important to
a series of algorithms,
and we found that as we write OpenSeal
algorithms that we use this quite a bit.
So flow control.
I mentioned that a little bit.
So we offer a feature in OpenSeal,
the language, called barriers.
And what barriers means is that
all your tasks will proceed
to a certain point and stop.
They will all synchronize,
like cars coming up to a stoplight.
And they will stop.
Once they all get there,
then they'll be allowed to continue.
So this gives you some control
over the execution of the tasks
that are running on the GPU.
So let's talk about how we
optimize it for the CPU and GPU.
First, I want to look a little
bit at kind of what,
how we integrate this
into your application.
So the first thing you have to do when
you integrate this into your application,
you have to find the compute-intensive
chunk of code in your application.
And you take that and you
write it into an OpenCL kernel.
You take that along with the data,
and you send it to the OpenCL framework.
And the OpenCL framework
will take that kernel,
runtime compile it,
and then send that data down to
the compute device with the kernel
that has been runtime compiled.
Now,
the compute device can be CPUs and GPUs.
and the complexities of what
a compute device can look like
is actually quite complex.
It can have a hierarchy of memory.
It literally can have
hundreds of compute units.
But OpenCL,
gives you a programming model for talking
to this hardware that makes it easy.
It abstracts that complexity
away so that you can get at
that computational horsepower.
So, let's look at a demo.
Now, this demo was one that you
have seen in Bertrand's session,
but I thought it was so good,
I had to show it again for
those who may not have seen it.
Now, what this demo shows is taking a
complex problem like a gravitational
simulation where you have 16,000 stars,
each one feeling the gravitational
effects of the other.
So it's an N-squared problem.
And what we're doing right now is we
have taken that code and we've just
compiled it like you normally would,
and we're running it on the CPU.
So a single core, and we're running it,
and it's getting two
gigaflops of compute power.
So gigaflops stands for billions of
floating-point operations per second.
Now, what we do,
as I just showed in the diagram,
is we take that code and we
move it to OpenSeal as a kernel.
and OpenSeal runtime compiles it
and optimizes it for the compute
device that you're targeting.
Now, OpenCL,
with the language that it enables
you to write the kernel language in,
is it targets the vector
instructions of the CPU.
And by doing that,
that's how we've gone from
2 gigaflops to 11 gigaflops.
Now, OpenCL is built on top of
Grand Central Dispatch.
And what that allows us to do, then,
is very easily tell OpenCL to run
this across all the CPU cores.
So by doing that,
now we've gone from 2 gigaflops to 67.
So now we're running across
all eight cores of the system,
and we're running with the
SSE instruction set native to these CPUs.
So OpenSeal runs across CPUs and GPUs.
I can take that same piece of code
now and have it execute on the GPU.
And by doing that,
we go to 105 gigaflops.
So that's a pretty
incredible performance boost.
And further,
what we can do is we can have
it run across CPUs and GPUs.
So I can have it run across both.
And that takes us up to
almost about 240 gigaflops.
And remember,
we started off at 2 gigaflops.
Now we're up at 240.
And we did this by not
writing any assembly,
by writing still C code.
So here's the demo I've shown,
which is the collision,
simulating the collision between the
Andromeda and the Milky Way galaxy.
This is actually real data that we got.
And this is simulating Earth,
the blue dot.
And I'll let it run a little
longer so you can see that
things don't go well for Earth.
So let's go back to slides.
Okay, so easy programming model.
What do I mean by that?
So the kernel language
in OpenCL is just C.
Based off of C99, plain vanilla C,
so that's really easy.
So I mentioned it's runtime
compiled and optimized.
We have real compiler technology
underneath OpenCL that
gives you optimal code.
And that's optimal for whether
you're targeting the CPUs or GPUs.
So we took C99 and we
added some data types.
We added vectors for getting
access to the vector instructions
of the compute device,
whether it be a CPU or GPU.
We added image data types,
making it easy to use
for imaging or graphics.
And we added address qualifiers,
giving you some access,
some control over the memory
hierarchy of a device.
We also provide a full math lib,
so the same math functions you're used
to when you're programming C normally.
The same IEEE compliant math.h.
So let's look at what a
compute kernel looks like.
It just looks like C.
I've highlighted the things that
are not traditional C in orange.
Let me zoom in a little bit
so we can get a look at that.
For the most part, it just looks like C.
And this is basically what I was
just showing you in the demo.
Okay, so as I said,
it's fully integrated with OpenGL.
And let's look at that
a little bit closer.
So traditionally,
OpenGL takes two types of inputs.
It takes textures and it takes geometry.
So your application traditionally
will be taking static textures
and static geometry and passing
it to the OpenGL framework,
and then OpenGL will be using
that to render using the GPU.
Now, what OpenCL allows you to do
is you can take that and have a
compute kernel with your data,
and you can use that to feed
OpenCL and have OpenCL dynamically
generate texture and vertex data.
So you can have a scene that is
dynamic and interactive by using
OpenCL as the front end for OpenGL,
and it can all be accelerated
either on CPU or GPU.
So I'm gonna show you
a demo of doing that.
So, what I have here is I have a bunny,
and he's sitting in a
nicely rendered room.
And traditionally,
OpenGL has been good at rendering, right?
So this looks like something
you could do with OpenGL.
But what is really interesting about
this is that I'm using OpenCL to
generate this fluid-like looking bunny.
And I can actually prove that
he's fluid because I can melt
him into a puddle on the floor.
So what we're doing is we're
actually using OpenCL to simulate
fluid and make it interactive,
make it an interactive
part of this environment.
So what I can do now is I can
actually interact with this fluid.
So this is a fluid simulation
running on the GPU.
So that bunny was actually a liquid
that we held in a little container,
and we released the container,
and he flowed into this puddle.
So this shows you how you can use
OpenCL to simulate real physical effects
and accelerate all of that on the GPU.
So let's go back to slides.
So OpenCL runs on all
Snow Leopard platforms on the CPU.
And it runs on a select set of models,
GPU accelerated,
and that is the select MacBook Pro, iMac,
and Mac Pro models.
So we talked a little bit
about the details of OpenCL.
What else can it do?
Well, just to go over some things,
it's really good for
graphics and imaging.
It's good for scientific visualization,
physics, you name it.
Really, any data-intensive algorithm,
you can use OpenCL to
accelerate and to optimize.
So we think it's going to be really
good for getting access to all that
computing horsepower on the system.
Now,
OpenCL is an Apple-developed technology
and Apple worked in conjunction
with industry leaders to define
the OpenCL specification.
And we're taking that specification,
Apple is taking that specification as
a proposed open standard to Kronos.
So we think that making OpenCL an
industry standard is going to be great.
We think it's going to
be fantastic for you,
developers, to be able to access this
across all the platforms.
So that's OpenCL.
Leverages the GPU,
optimized for the CPU and GPU,
easy programming model so
you can make use of it,
not a lot of work,
fully integrated with OpenGL.
and it's new in Snow Leopard and on the
disc that you can get Snow Leopard Seed.
[Transcript missing]
It is, it enables this by
making animations easy.
So core animation is at the heart
of the iPhone user experience.
It is what drives the
iPhone interactivity.
The UI in the iPhone is built
directly on top of the core
animation that is on the iPhone.
So let's look at some examples.
So CoverFlow.
CoverFlow is built with Core Automation.
It's a good example of an immersive,
interactive user experience.
You can use it for heads-up displays
over media and other content.
So what I want to show is a demo
that we showed a couple years ago.
at WWC when we introduced
coordination for Snow Leopard.
So what we have here is we have a
core animation application where every
tile here is a core animation layer.
And these layers can be animated
and animated in 3D space.
The animation is being automatically
controlled by core animation.
It's what is making these things
move smoothly through space.
You just set the
beginning and end states,
and it animates through all
the positions that you need to
to get the smooth animation.
So one of the things that we are
showing here is really pushing
the limits of core animation.
This is over 300 layers.
And this is very similar to the
demo we showed two years ago.
And what we want to show here is that
all the power that we've been giving
you through Core Animation on the
desktop is available on the phone.
So you can make great animations.
So Core Animation is also on the desktop,
Mac OS.
And new for Snow Leopard,
we've added a particle systems engine,
transform layers and gradient layers,
so some new ways to make
new layer behaviors.
So that's Core Automation,
and we think Core Automation is a
really key technology for building
immersive user experiences.
So let's talk about OpenGL.
OpenGL was traditionally
a desktop technology.
And recently,
a smaller version of it has come
into existence called OpenGL ES,
and that's what we have on the iPhone.
So let's talk a little
bit more about OpenGL ES.
So OpenGL ES is a scaled
version of its big brother.
It's a simplified API.
But it's an industry standard,
just like the desktop version of OpenGL.
And on the iPhone,
we deliver OpenGL ES 1.1.
It's GPU accelerated with
a lightning-fast GPU,
as you saw in the games in the keynote.
This thing is going to be great
for building really great graphics.
So, Core Animation is the layers
that OpenGL ES renders into.
So what that means is that when
you render with OpenGL ES into
a Core Animation layer,
you can use that to do all
the great things that we were
showing with Core Animation with
OpenGL ES rendered into that layer.
So it's integrated into the heart
of the display system on the iPhone.
So let's do a little comparison
between OpenGL ES on iPhone
and OpenGL on the desktop.
First, we have all the great
optimized paths of OpenGL,
vertex arrays, multi-texturing.
The simplified API part of
that is that we've removed the
APIs that are less efficient,
like immediate mode paths for
passing geometry into OpenGL ES.
It has depth buffers, stencil buffers,
and multi-sampling,
the same types of buffers
you're used to on the desktop.
It does not have shaders.
It's a fixed function API.
So let's look at a
demo of this in action.
So this is a demo that some of
the engineers at Apple wrote
to kind of test and to really
push the limits of the iPhone.
This is a little game,
which I'm traditionally pretty bad at.
Okay, so OpenGL ES is really
great on the phone.
It's going to enable all kinds of great
immersive high-performance graphics.
So, let's talk about
optimizing for the iPhone.
Memory is going to be limited.
On the iPhone,
you have 24 megabytes of memory for
use for textures and for surfaces.
To help optimize for that,
we've enabled compressed textures.
We highly encourage you to
compress all your texture data.
That'll give you a large savings
in how much texture space
you're using with your content.
And the OpenGL ES is enabled
in the iPhone simulator,
letting you write all the same
OpenGL code on the simulator and
test it and run it on the simulator
before you upload it on the device
for really seeing how it performs.
Now, when you upload it on the iPhone,
We have instruments.
Instruments give you real-time tools
for profiling and optimizing for iPhone.
It's the same types of tools that
you're used to on our desktop,
such as the OpenGL driver monitor.
Same types of great tools are
built right into instruments.
So that's OpenGL and OpenGL ES.
Now let's talk about color.
So Apple has been a leader in color
management and color technology.
And I want to talk a little bit
about what we're doing to make
that even better on Mac OS X.
So display gamma.
So when Mac OS was first introduced,
Display Gamma of 1.8 was chosen.
And since then,
the web has come along and has chosen
a display default gamma of 2.2.
Media has chosen a gamma of 2.2.
So we've decided that it's time
to switch Mac OS to gamma 2.2.
So we're going to be doing
that in Snow Leopard.
And in fact, the seed you have,
we've already switched it.
So now the question is, what do you do?
What does that mean for you?
Well, it means nothing.
You don't have to do anything.
If, with some caveats,
you're already using modern
APIs and your application is
tagging your media and graphics.
So if you're not doing that,
we encourage you to move on to modern
APIs and tag all your content because
we want Mac OS X to be a color-managed
system from the top to the bottom.
So now let's talk about
what's new for Snow Leopard.
What are we adding to
our color management?
First, we're adding the ability to tag
windows with a color sync profile.
Second, we're adding 64-bit and
128-bit window depth.
So 64 and 128 bits per pixel
You'll be able to get
that into a window now.
And what this means is we're
driving color management and
deeper pixels deeper into Mac OS X,
making it an even better
platform for color.
So that's ColorSync.
So we've talked about OpenCL,
we've talked about core animation,
talked about OpenGL,
and we've talked about color.
And that's the graphics that
we want to talk about today.
So now let's talk about media.
And to do that, I'm going to invite
Tim Bienz up to cover media.
Hi, John.
Good afternoon, everyone.
I'm Tim.
As you heard John talk about
iPhone and desktop Mac OS and
scaling technologies between them,
most of the scaling you heard
about was bringing technologies
from the desktop down to iPhone.
However, it's also possible for
technologies to scale the other
way from iPhone back to Mac OS.
We'd like to take a look at today at
Quick Time and Core Audio which provide
examples of scaling in both directions.
Let's start with Quick Time.
To do that,
let's go back two years ago to
the graphics and media state
of the union here at WWDC.
At that time, we told you the following.
Look at the first point
on the slide here.
Using our high-level Cocoa APIs is
the best way to ensure
compatibility with the future.
Secondly,
we were undertaking a bunch of work in
our low-level engine to modernize it.
And although we couldn't tell you
at the time what the reason was,
there was a reason,
and the reason was iPhone.
The desktop code base we
had was not really suitable
for scaling down to iPhone,
and so we had to undertake development
of a new code base for use on iPhone.
In doing so,
we had three guiding principles.
First of all,
whatever we did needed to be portable.
We knew it had to run
on the iPhone processor.
In addition, we knew it had to run on the
Intel processors in the desktop.
Secondly,
whatever we did had to be modular.
We knew we needed a system where we
could pick and choose pieces and features
to deploy on individual products.
We couldn't have a system where
we're sort of all or nothing.
Third, whatever we did had to be
efficient and performant.
And this means a lot of different
things in a lot of different contexts.
But for battery-powered systems,
which as you know are becoming
more and more important,
one of the extremely important attributes
of efficiency is battery lifetime.
So, we implemented based on these three
principles and hopefully you've all
had a chance to enjoy the really
great video quality we have on iPhone,
be it displaying content from the web,
or from the iTunes store,
or from any other source.
We're really happy with the way the
video work on the iPhone turned out.
As you heard Bertrand
talking about earlier today,
we're bringing what we learned from that
work back to the desktop in Snow Leopard
as the beginning of QuickTime 10.
Now, QuickTime 10 is a really exciting
and important announcement
for us here at WWDC this year.
It represents a significant ongoing
technology investment by Apple to
provide a modern foundation for media.
Let's take a look at three
areas of focus for QuickTime 10.
First of all,
seamless Mac OS X integration.
Secondly, a focus on modern codecs.
And third, high-level APIs.
Let's begin by looking at
seamless Mac OS X integration.
And several examples of this are 64-bit.
The code base for Mac OS X is
fully 64-bit native.
Secondly, color sync.
Whatever we do in QuickTime 10 is fully
color managed throughout by color sync.
Third, core animation.
You heard John talking about the
importance of core animation on
the desktop and the centrality
of core animation on the iPhone.
We've recently done a lot of work
in the rendering pipeline of QtKit,
our Objective-C layer,
to better integrate with core animation.
And in fact,
you can really do some things easily
now that used to be really hard to do.
So, let's talk about another
side of integration.
Sometimes for integration,
it's better just to let other parts
of the system do what they do best.
First example is still image support.
Mac OS X has a robust framework
for doing still image support,
and that's Image I.O.
So rather than doing image
support in QuickTime 10,
you should use core Image I.O.
for your still image support.
Secondly, let's talk about interactivity.
Apple has been working
over the past years on web
technologies for interactivity.
And as you heard in
the keynote last year,
the graphics and media keynote,
and you'll hear a little bit more
in the section in this keynote,
State of the Union Following Mine,
You can really use web technologies
to do some really great interactivity.
And so we believe that interactivity
does not belong within the media system.
Instead, you should be using web
technologies such as HTML and
JavaScript to do interactivity.
talk about modern codecs.
And as you know, Apple is in the business
of selling content.
This has three interesting implications.
First of all,
it means that we really need
high-quality video and audio
codecs in order to provide the kind
of content that we need to sell.
[Transcript missing]
Secondly, it means that we work with
our content providers in movie
studios and music labels,
and that has the effect that we
get a lot of feedback from them
as to the quality of the content,
and so we are able to improve the quality
of the codex significantly from that.
In addition,
we receive an awfully broad range of
content from our content providers,
and that also feeds back into
improving the quality of our codex.
Third, it means that we have an
interest in having codex
that can last for many years.
Neither we nor you are interested
in having to re-encode your
content periodically just to
update to the latest standards.
Another thing that's true, as you know,
is that Apple has a very
broad hardware product line,
all the way from iPods and iPhones
up to high-end desktop machines.
We need a single audio and
video codex that can span
this entire range of products.
The answer to this is standards,
and standards are central to media.
In particular,
there are a few standards that
are of critical importance to us.
First is the MPEG-4 file format,
which is based on the
QuickTime file format.
Secondly is AAC audio codex.
Third, H.264 video codex.
In addition, there are other standards,
such as closed captions,
that are quite important to us.
Let's take a look at audio for a moment.
AAC does not,
as many people seem to believe,
stand for Apple Audio Codec.
It really stands for
Advanced Audio Coding,
and it is the premier audio
codec in the MPEG-4 standards.
It's a variable bit rate codec,
which means it is very efficient and
only uses the minimum number of bits
necessary to encode the complexity of the
local region of audio you're encoding.
There are many uses for AAC,
all the way from iTunes Plus,
which is the approximately 256
kilobit per second audio we
sell through the iTunes Store.
We've had really positive feedback on the
quality of the content in iTunes Plus.
In addition,
there's a low delay mode for AAC,
which is very useful for
real-time communications.
Another example is multi-channel audio.
AAC supports multi-channel audio
to allow you to do surround sound.
On the video side,
H.264 goes by many names.
In addition to H.264,
it's also known as MPEG-4 Part 10, AVC,
and JVT.
The reason for this is
primarily historical.
The initial work on H.264
started in a number of places,
none of which seem to have
been able to afford to buy a
vowel from what I can tell,
and was later unified to
produce the final standard.
H.264 is an extremely
robust and rich standard.
And to understand what this means,
it's useful to go back and look
at a somewhat earlier standard
that was less rich but still
a moderately rich standard,
and that's MPEG-2.
If you look at what happened
over the history of MPEG-2,
as implementations took more
and more advantage of the
full breadth of the standard,
it was possible to encode video
of the same quality at lower and
lower bit rates as time went on.
We've seen the same thing
happening with H.264 already.
We expect it to continue happening,
and I expect it to happen to a
degree even more than it did in
MPEG-2 because of the extreme
richness of the H.264 standard.
In addition, H.264 can be used across a
wide range of display sizes,
all the way from small QSIF 176x144
sizes appropriate for edge
networks on mobile devices,
all the way up to full
HD sizes useful on desktop.
With the introduction today of the iPhone
3G and the already existing edge support,
it's useful to focus on this and
just take a look at examples of
a couple pieces of content and
what they look like on the phone,
so let's go do that.
So as you can see, H.264 is usable down
to very low bit rates.
However, if you're able to
allocate additional bits,
for example, for a 3G network,
you'll be able to get
significantly better quality.
So, let's...
Talk about high-level APIs.
And for us, primarily,
this means Cocoa APIs and
specifically QtKit.
In QuickTime 10,
what we're doing in Snow Leopard
is having QtKit actually bridge
across QuickTime 10 and QuickTime 7.
Bertrand talked about this a little
in his talk earlier this afternoon.
What this means for you is that
you can use the same APIs you're
already using for playing back
content using QuickTime 7 and
use them to take advantage of the
additional efficiencies and color
correction and other modern features
we're introducing in QuickTime 10.
In order to do this,
you do need to opt into
the QuickTime 10 code path.
It's actually really easy to
do that in your application.
We strongly encourage you to
do that in order that you take
advantage of all the modern features
we're adding in QuickTime 10,
as well as the ongoing tuning we're
going to be doing in that code path.
Along with our focus on Objective-C APIs,
we are deprecating
QtJava in Snow Leopard.
So QuickTime 10, three areas of focus--
seamless Mac OS X integration,
modern codecs,
and a focus on high-level APIs.
QuickTime 10, shipping the beginnings of
QuickTime 10 in Snow Leopard.
That includes support for
playback of H.264 and AAC content.
Why playback?
Because it's what most
of your applications and
most of our customers do.
Why H.264 and AAC?
Because it's the codex that
plays back across the entire
range of products we have,
and it's what we're focusing on.
Let's turn our attention
to audio for a moment,
core audio.
Let's again look at iPhone.
iPhone has an extremely
complex audio environment.
In addition to a number of
audio sources on iPhone,
there are a number of places, headphones,
Bluetooth, so on,
where content can be played out.
We needed technologies that
could support the very complex
audio environment on iPhone.
It turns out we already
had them on the desktop.
Core Audio and Open AL were just
what we needed to support the iPhone.
Let's take a look.
On Mac OS, on the desktop,
we support OpenAL,
technologies you heard earlier
in Bertrand's talk for rendering
sound in three dimensions,
shares a coordinate space with OpenGL.
In addition, we have system sounds,
which support key clicks and
very simple system sounds.
Audio file and audio cue,
very useful for doing audio
playback and recording.
And finally, audio units,
which allow you to get at
low-level things such as
mixing and other attributes.
On the phone,
we've brought all of these things across.
In addition, we've implemented a new API,
Audio Session,
used for managing the complex
audio environment on the phone.
And this allows you,
in your applications,
to provide the same kind of
seamless audio experience that we
provide in our own applications.
One feature I should mention that's
shared between the phone and desktop,
because it's been very much requested,
is the phone does support the
ability to do full duplex audio,
both inputting and outputting
audio simultaneously,
which is really useful for
real-time communications.
So that's Core Audio.
Putting everything together,
as you just heard,
the way we've scaled from the
desktop to iPhone on the audio
side is to bring the Core Audio and
Open AL technologies down to iPhone
so that you can use your knowledge
and leverage that that you already
have on the desktop in implementing
great applications on the iPhone.
QuickTime 10,
a really important and extremely
exciting announcement for us here.
QuickTime 10 represents a significant
ongoing investment from us to
implement a modern framework for media.
With that,
I'd like to turn it over to Gilles Drieu,
who will be talking about how to
use graphics and media on the web.
Gilles?
Thank you.
Thank you, Tim.
Good afternoon, everyone.
All right.
So you just heard from Tim and
John about our latest and greatest
graphics and media technologies.
I'm here today to tell you why
they are so essential on the Web.
Today,
We'll see how web standards
help shape graphics and media,
and how these same graphics and
media can be leveraged on iPhone.
First, web standards.
Over time, graphics content has become as
commonly used as text on the web.
But really today, it is not just about
standalone graphics anymore.
It is about integrating them in
rich and dynamic experiences.
And that means defining a rich
presentation for your content.
And you guys,
as web designers and developers,
are very familiar with that concept.
With CSS, you know how to style
your HTML web pages.
CSS stands for Cascading Style Sheet.
And CSS was standardized
over 10 years ago by the W3C.
And it has become a very powerful tool.
And it's supported in all major browsers.
But we think that more can be done.
Apple has been working with the
W3C on a brand new set of rich,
compelling features for graphics: CSS,
Visual Effects.
CSS Visual Effects,
such as the ones you can
see on the screen here,
have been designed to take
full advantage of our graphics
stacks on modern platforms.
Now, you can polish your design with
masks or gradients or reflections,
and you can add life to your
content with transforms,
transitions, or animations.
And I'll show you what it really can do
for you in a demo in a couple of minutes.
Now, that's about graphics as standards.
What about media content?
As you all know, audio and video are
everywhere on the web today.
And traditionally,
we've been using plug-in to
handle that type of media.
But a natural evolution would be to
integrate our media within these rich
experiences in a very seamless way.
As seamlessly as you integrate images,
for instance.
Well, for images, we have an image tag.
So we believe it is time to
make audio and video first-class
citizens in your web pages.
How about an audio and a video tag?
Apple has been very actively
working with the W3C and the Watt
Working Group on a new set of
media elements for audio and video.
And it is now part of the HTML5
specification draft for you.
OK, so audio and video tags.
Well, they are page elements.
As such, they are styleable with CSS and
scriptable with JavaScript,
like any other element.
They work beautifully with H.264 and ASE,
our state-of-the-art video and audio
codecs that Tim mentioned earlier,
but they also offer a very
elegant fallback mechanism.
In the current shipping
version of Safari 3.1,
we implemented the audio and video tag
on top of the QuickTime technology.
We also implemented the CSS visual
effects and specifically
transforms and transitions.
Because Safari is built on top
of our graphics and media stacks,
respectively Quartz and QuickTime,
you get the absolutely best
performance and quality.
That was about web standards
and graphics and media.
Now you know what you can do with them.
Now we're going to talk about
some of the innovations we've
been working on on iPhone.
As you know, less than a year ago,
we introduced iPhone, and with it,
a full-fledged web experience.
And as you heard,
it's been an incredible success.
And you guys have been awesome.
Like really, in less than a year,
you implemented over 1,700
web applications for iPhone,
for Safari on iPhone.
and your applications are awesome too.
Like, they are dynamic and interactive
and they take advantage of
the full large touchscreen.
We love them and we believe we can
help you do even better with more
access to graphics and media features.
OK, so as you heard from John and team,
our graphics and media features are
scalable and at the core of iPhone.
So we thought about it,
and we decided to integrate
Safari with the same graphics and
media stacks that are currently used
and leveraged by native applications.
First, we implemented CSS visual effects.
And specifically,
we focused on transforms, transitions,
and animations,
because we know that these are the
ones you need to build your next
generation rich user interfaces.
And as you heard in a previous session,
in Dash Code,
you can leverage very easily in
the tool the same technologies.
As you heard from John, though,
we also have a beautiful
compositing system on iPhone,
and it's called Core Animation.
We took the same technology beyond
core animation and we built it
right inside Safari on iPhone.
That gives us access to the
full power of GPU acceleration,
which opens the doors for 3D transforms,
for instance, which you can control over
the same CSS transformations
we talked about earlier.
You still have 2D transformations,
which also are GPU accelerated,
and you also have now 3D transformations.
So let me show you what
it really means for you.
What you see on the screen is an example
of an animated scene of falling leaves.
And this has been implemented with
traditional JavaScript techniques.
And as you can see, it looks pretty good.
Now, side by side.
On the right side,
you see the same animated scene
leveraging the GPU acceleration
and CSS visual effects.
As you can see,
there's a pretty substantial
performance improvement here.
As a matter of fact,
almost ten times faster.
Not only that,
but it took us 100 lines of
JavaScript for the first version,
and now it takes us ten lines of
CSS for the exact same animated scene.
What does it really mean for you
web developers and designers?
Well,
it means that you can not only benefit
from the maximum performance on a device,
but also gain very,
very much in productivity.
That's what it means for you.
Okay.
So that's --
So we talked about the new graphics
features on Safari for iPhone.
Now, on iPhone, we have a really seamless
playback system here.
It's very easy to embed your content,
as you know.
It leverages beautifully H.264 and ASE.
It's high performance, built right in.
You guys told us you love it.
But as usual, you want more.
And you want more
control over your media.
And we listen to you.
And for this reason,
we implemented the JavaScript methods
and DOM events that will help you
control your media within the playback.
These APIs are compatible with the same
APIs that have been used for many years
on QuickTime plugin on desktop browsers.
That's right.
That means that all the content you've
been working on for the past 10 years,
you can leverage on iPhone
today the exact same content.
It's compatible.
But we didn't stop there.
There's also a need to trigger
the full screen playback from
your custom web applications.
And so we implemented also APIs that
help you trigger the playback
from your custom UIs as well.
All right.
So,
There are two things I'd
like you to remember today.
First, web standards are the
backbone of the web.
And we at Apple are very committed
to evolving further in particular
when it comes to graphics and media.
Second,
On OS X, we have great graphics
and media technologies.
And as you heard,
they scale beautifully onto iPhone.
And we expose them for
you in Safari on iPhone.
That means your web graphics
become fast and dynamic,
and your web video is
simple and very immersive.
So check them out this week, you know,
and start tuning up your web apps.
I'm still waiting for you.
I would love to show you these
demos because that's a bit
hard to visualize without them.
Okay.
All right.
No demos.
As you can tell,
I'm really happy right now.
Because I was really excited
to show you these demos.
So that's really unfortunate here.
Okay.
So that was about web.
And now I'd like to turn it back to John.
Thank you, Gilles.
So just before the show,
some of my engineers came to me.
They had this really fun demo.
And we decided that
It shows the ability of OpenSeal
to do some really fun stuff.
And we decided we had to show it.
So to do that,
I'm going to invite Jeff Stahl
on stage and Nick Burns,
and we're going to take
a look at this demo.
So this demo will take a few
minutes to look at something that
we can do with OpenCL on the GPU.
And if we switch to the demo machine,
please.
There we go.
Okay.
Now you've been waiting for this.
Let's show you what we can
do with OpenCL on the GPU.
What you have here is an instruction
level emulation of an Apple II 6502
processor running on OpenCL.
And of course, with an Apple II,
you get full AppleSoft basic support.
So, but... We're graphics folks,
so we thought we'd do something
a little bit more immersive,
3D graphics circa 1982.
standing 4-bit graphics.
So -- Obviously,
one of the most recognized
games of the Apple II era,
but it is interesting to take a second
to talk about exactly how this was done.
So this is an OpenCL kernel,
the emulators -- an instruction-level
emulator running completely in OpenCL,
about 2,300 lines of code.
This is then -- the data stream
input is the processor state,
the memory, and the disk representation,
and this OpenCL kernel iterates on that,
obviously, to produce the frames.
We then take a back-end,
custom-written OpenGL fragment shader
to take the exciting 4-bit graphics and
convert them for the big screen here.
And we'll see what luck
Nick has with the princess.
I don't think this is
going to go very well.
Oh, that was not good.
In any case, you know,
when you have one Apple II, that's great,
but how about having maybe 64 Apple IIs?
So this is 64 Apple IIs running
on top of OpenCL on the GPU.
Thank you very much.
So we've talked about graphics,
and we've talked about media,
and then we've talked about how
to get access to all that great
technology through the web.
was our demo.
Okay,
so Apple has spent a lot of time taking
all these great technologies and scaling
them across both iPhone OS and Mac OS,
and we've optimized them for those
platforms so that you can build great
applications on top of this technology.
and Apple has a wealth of other
technologies that are going to
be covered this week at WWC.
We encourage you to go and see
all of them and learn about
all the great technologies
on both iPhone OS and Mac OS.
We have labs downstairs.
We have the Graphics and Media Lab with
engineers there all week that will
answer all the details that you
want about these technologies.
And we have an iPhone Lab downstairs
with engineers there all week
long to answer any questions.
So thank you for staying,
and welcome to WWC.